[music playing]
[indistinct talking]
[horse neighs]
[instruments playing]
[playing flute]
[humming]
[non-English singing]
[violin playing]
[flute playing]
[harmonizing]
[indistinct talking]
[flute playing]
Where does an
Ashokh learn to play?
From his father.
And he, where did he learn?
From his father
and so on back.
How far back?
Back to God.
>> [PRIEST] And where is God
just now?
God, just now,
is in Sarykamich.
>> [PRIEST] What is God doing
there?
>>[FATHER] He is making double
ladders on the tops of them.
He is fixing happiness.
And why is God doing that?
So that people and
nations can go up and down.
So your family wants
you to become a priest?
Yes, but I am
interested in science.
Then, study medicine as well.
Body and soul depend
on one another.
Become yourself.
Then God and the
devil don't matter.
Pick it up.
[yelling]
What is it?
He's a Yezidi.
He can't get out of the circle.
[screams]
[humming]
He was buried yesterday.
A spirit crept into him during
the night and brought him here.
He is evil.
Now he can't do any more harm.
Father.
When you die, father,
is nothing left?
How shall I put it?
Some people say we
have a soul that
goes on living when we are
dead, but I don't believe this.
And yet, I'm certain
beyond all doubt
that through certain
experiences we
can develop a very fine
substance in ourselves.
When we die, this substance
does not die at the same time,
but much later.
[harmonizing]
[loud banging]
[whistle blows]
[yelling]
[chuckling]
>>[SARKIS POGOSSIAN]
Are you Gurdjieff?
>>[G.I. GURDJIEFF] Yes.
Ah, I'm Sarkis Pogossian.
I've just come from Kars.
Your father asked
me to give you this.
Thank you.
Have you anywhere to stay?
No, the town's full.
Stay with me.
I'm here to finish my
studies, and in two years
I'll be ordained as a priest.
Is that what you want?
My faith is very strong.
But a priest-- to become
a priest-- I don't know.
My father says if you
want to lose your faith,
make friends with a priest.
Nothing convinces me, either.
Science proves one
thing, religion another,
and both seem equally true.
So what?
I've read every sort
of book-- new, old.
I've seen marvels
which I can't explain,
and I am more thirsty than ever.
What are you looking for?
I want to know why I am here.
>>[POGOSSIAN]
Why I'm here?
Can any of us know that?
There's a group of us all
shattered by that question.
Nothing will stop us
until we find an answer.
[Iindistinct talking,
flute playing]
This collection is unique.
It gives the mathematical
basis of studies
in the old monasteries.
I knew it had to
exist somewhere.
[non-English speech]
He wants 5 rubels.
Impossible.
[non-English speech]
We must have them.
>>[GURDJIEFF]
American canary!
Magnificent American canary!
>>[WOMAN SHOPPING] How much?
5 rubels.
>>[WOMAN SHOPPING] I'll take it.
[indistinct talking]
There's nothing in this.
Nor this.
Quick!
We found something.
>>[MAN] What is it?
Can you read it?
It's in old Armenian.
They seem to be letters
from one monk to another.
"We have at last succeeded
in learning the truth
about the Sarmoung brotherhood."
Sarmoung?
I've seen that name
in one of the books.
Here.
"Sarmoung-- the most ancient
of all the secret schools.
It was founded in Babylon
in the year 2500 BC,
but after the sixth century
disappeared without a trace."
Go on.
"The Sarmoung
brotherhood exists
in the valley of Izrumin,
three days from Nivssi."
It may still be there today.
We must go.
It's a dangerous region.
There have been massacres.
It's not important.
It's forbidden to foreigners.
The frontier is closed,
and it's heavily guarded.
I must find this school.
We haven't the money.
I'll make some.
I'll ride on the devil's
back if necessary,
as long as I get there.
Anyhow, we can't all go.
I'm coming with you.
[barking]
Sit down.
Puppy, puppy!
Puppy!
Puppy, pup--
[barking]
[chuckling]
[horse neighs]
>>[MAN] Halt!
Halt!
[gunshots]
>>[GURDJIEFF] Jump!
>>[POGOSSIAN] Ah!
My leg.
[knocking]
I have a letter for you.
My friend is very ill.
Bring him in.
You are very welcome.
I have lived here all my life.
There has never been
a school like the one
you described-- not here.
What did you say it was called?
Sarmoung?
A year before last, a
man quite unknown to me
came and asked me to show
him a map I possess.
How could he have
known I had it?
I have no idea.
I inherited it from
my grandfather.
The man was so persistent.
I thought why shouldn't
I let him see it.
He looked at the parchment
and immediately offered
me 200 Turkish pounds for it.
You might like to
take a look at it.
>>[GURDJIEFF] Sarmoung.
>>[PRIEST] He said it was a map
of Egypt before the sands.
I didn't wish to
part with it anyway.
I didn't need the
money, so I refused.
The next day, he came
to offer 500 pounds.
Now, I was tempted,
but this proved to me
it must be very valuable.
It must not be let go too
cheaply, so I refused again.
He then explained to me he was
a Russian prince who needed it
for his collection of antiques,
and if I wouldn't part with it,
would I let him make a
copy of it for 200 pounds.
Just think-- 200 pounds
for a copy of a parchment.
He's gone.
We must go to Egypt.
Don't worry.
We'll pay the price.
[chanting]
[non-English speech]
You.
Help me with these.
Of course.
Hey, gravedigger!
Prince Lubovedsky.
Are you still
collecting the dust
of people who died long ago?
Why not?
At least it's real.
Not imaginary like
your life's work.
Where did you get that?
Are you the man who gave 200
pounds to an Armenian priest
to copy this map?
Yes, I am that man.
We need to speak to one another.
[piano music]
Since I was a child,
I had the feeling
that something is missing in me.
I felt that apart
from my ordinary life,
there is another life... a
life which is calling me.
But how to be open to it?
This question never
gives me any peace,
and I've become like a
hungry dog chasing everywhere
for an answer.
You should be happy
you've had that experience.
When I was your age, I was
only interested in myself.
I was always concerned with
satisfying my needs and those
of my family.
Suddenly, my wife
died in childbirth.
I could not recover
from the shock.
Life had no meaning anymore.
One day, an old dervish came
to the house and asked for me.
We talked together for a
long time, and as he spoke,
I experienced
something far greater
than all the impulses
I normally obeyed.
When the dervish left me,
the experience vanished,
but I knew what I
was looking for.
For that, help was needed.
Fortunately, I had
the means to travel.
I went to Africa, India,
Afghanistan, and Persia.
I organized special
expeditions to places
where I thought I
might find an answer.
I lived in monasteries
and met many people
with interests
similar to my own.
How can I meet such people?
I need to know.
What do you need to know?
I want to learn.
I want to understand.
Be careful.
What do you call learning-- if
it means storing up experiences
and beliefs, it will
tie you like a cord
and prevent you from knowing.
Knowing happens directly.
Where not even a thought stands
between you and the thing
you know.
Then you see
yourself as you are,
not as you would like to be.
I have learned how
difficult this can be.
Dear, young friend.
I will do everything I can
to help you attain your aim.
This is the dervish,
Bogga-Eddin.
You wish to ask something?
What exercise can help me
feel myself in a new way?
I have been in
Upper Bukhara where
I met a most interesting man.
We came here together.
This old man is a
member of a brotherhood
from the heart of Asia.
He's living not far from here.
Go and see him.
Talk with him about the
questions which interest you.
This may help you to
become clear about what
it is you seek.
[music playing, chanting]
[indistinct talking]
One can think well here.
You are Russian?
Yes.
I am glad to speak
to someone from Russia.
I have been in Russia.
Ah.
But that is not the point.
Hey, Gogo.
Gogo.
How do you know that name?
Only my mother and my
nurse ever called me by it,
and that was over 40 years ago.
Gogo, you have worked and
suffered all these years
but you never knew how to work.
How to let the
desire of your mind
become the desire of your heart.
Who are you?
>>[PROFESSOR SKRIDLOV] How do
you know me so well?
Does it really matter
who I am or what I am?
Isn't your curiosity
one of the chief reasons
your life has come to nothing?
Is it so strong that
even now all you want
is an explanation of who
I am and how I know you?
Yes, father.
You are right.
I have seen many miracles
and tried to explain them,
but it has brought me
no real understanding.
Yes, I'm empty.
It's too late.
I do not truly want to
know what I just asked you.
I sincerely beg your pardon.
Perhaps it is
not yet too late.
If you feel with all your being
that you really are empty,
then I advise you
to try once more.
If you agree to one
condition, I want to help you.
The condition is
die, consciously,
to the life you
have led until now.
And go where I shall indicate.
[non-English speech]
I am looking for the
dervish Bogga-Eddin.
He has returned to Bukhara.
[yelling]
I owe them money.
I-- I have been a
cheat all my life.
I used to steal from my mother.
I forged bank notes.
I'll try to help you.
Professor Skridlov!
This is my friend.
Soloviev.
The Prince has gone away.
I know.
What now?
At last, I am on the track
of something really important.
I have learned that under
the sands of the Gobi Desert,
villages and even entire
cities lie buried.
The information has been
handed down from father to son
under the vow of secrecy.
I think I can find the
site of an ancient library.
Can you imagine the
secret scroll that
might still be buried there?
I'm preparing an expedition.
Would you like to come?
We need men we can trust.
I can bring some friends.
[music playing]
[yelling]
[indistinct talking]
I didn't think you'd
reach us in time.
Nor did we, nor did we.
We had to cross the Amu Darya.
There were Afghan guards and
British soldiers everywhere.
So Yelov got hold of a
uniform of a British soldier
and passed himself off
as an officer from India.
[chuckling]
What are those poles?
That is something I
have to learn about.
There are many
dangers, but we've
found some
extraordinary solutions.
They may save our lives.
[non-English speech]
There's always a way of
keeping our thoughts alive.
I'm learning Tibetan.
[wind howling]
[horse neighs]
[yelling]
>>[MAN] Untie them!
Quickly!
We are lost.
Look!
[rumbling]
Careful!
They are dangerous!
[gunshot]
I cannot ask you
to go any further.
Now, we must separate again
until one of us finds a way.
I must go to Bukhara.
I can't go back now.
Take me with you?
[instruments playing]
Do you know the
dervish Bogga-Eddin?
[non-English speech]
Do you know Bogga-Eddin?
The dervish Bogga-Eddin?
Is the dervish
Bogga-Eddin in Bukhara?
Have you found what
you are looking for?
I have found nothing.
I don't know how to search.
There's never any answer.
What can I do now?
I'm desperate.
You will never find
the answer by yourself.
Alone, a man can do very little.
His only hope is to find a
place where real knowledge has
been kept alive.
I advise you to try to find
the Sarmoung brotherhood.
Go up the Amu Darya.
Go towards Kafiristan.
It is a dangerous undertaking.
You will be risking your life.
But at the right moment,
there will be a guide.
Can I take my friend with me?
I think you may if you
can vouch for his honor.
[chanting]
I think that you
are foreigners.
Please do not be alarmed.
I do not want to know who
you are or why you're here.
It would be pleasant for
me to talk with a European.
My name is Father Giovanni.
Long ago, I was a
Christian missionary,
then accidentally
I came in contact
with members of the
world brotherhood.
We were striving for what
I dreamed of all my life.
I was admitted to
their brotherhood.
Since then, I've never
wished to go anywhere else.
You are welcome.
Father Giovanni,
how can you stay here
instead of returning to
Italy and giving the people
there something
of the faith which
you are now inspiring in me?
Ah, Professor, you do not
understand mens' psyche as well
as you know archaeology.
Faith cannot be given to men.
Faith is not the
result of thinking.
It comes from direct knowledge.
For example, if my
own brother were
to entreat me to give him a
tenth part of my understanding,
I could not.
As he has neither the knowledge
or the experience which
I have acquired in my life.
This would be like wishing
to fill someone with bread
merely by looking at him.
>>[MONK] There is a law.
The quality of
what you understand
depends upon the quality
of the person speaking.
In our order, we have
two very old brethren.
The one is called Brother
Ahl, the other Brother Sez.
They constantly travel from one
monastery to another preaching
there.
Once or twice a year,
they come to us.
This is always a
very great event.
When Brother Sez speaks,
it is like the song
of the birds in paradise.
Brother Ahl's speech has
almost the opposite effect.
He speaks badly
and indistinctly.
The stronger the impression
made by Brother Sez,
the quicker it evaporates
until there is nothing left.
Brother Ahl makes
almost no impression,
but what he says penetrates into
the heart and remains there.
As we all came
to the conclusion
that the sermons of Brother Sez
came entirely from his mind,
and acted only on our minds.
Whereas those of Brother Ahl
came directly from his being
and acted on our being.
Yes, Professor, thinking and
knowing are quite different.
One must strive to know.
This alone can lead
to our Lord God.
[music playing]
Father Giovanni has
consented to take me
under his protection.
I'm going to stay here.
I have a feeling I have
nothing more to seek.
Your guide is waiting.
I must ask you to
take a solemn oath never
to reveal to anyone the place
to which we will lead you.
[music playing]
[non-English speech]
[chanting]
I thought I'd
lost you forever.
I'm happy that you got here
by yourself without my help.
It proves that during this
time you haven't been asleep.
Are you ill?
It's nothing.
Come with me.
[drums banging]
[chanting]
>>[MAN] Stop!
Everyone in the monastery
learns the alphabet
of these movements.
They are exactly like books.
We can read in them truths
placed there many thousands
of years ago.
I understand.
[music playing]
>> [MAN] Affirming.
Denying.
Reconciling.
Affirming.
Denying.
Reconciling.
Affirming.
Denying.
Reconciling.
[music playing]
What is the real meaning
of these movements?
They tell us of two
qualities of energy
moving without interruption
through the body.
As long as the dancer can keep
in balance these two energies,
he has a force that
nothing else can give.
[music playing]
This morning, I was
called to the patriarch.
He told me that I have
only three years to live
and advised me to spend
them in the Olman monastery
on the northern slopes
of the Himalayas
in order to accomplish what I
have dreamed of all my life.
He said he would
arrange everything
to make my stay
there productive.
I agreed to set out at once.
Oh, God.
Is it true?
Yes.
There is no better
way to finish my life.
Perhaps I shall
be able to make up
for all the years
I lost senselessly.
[ringing]
[chanting]
Listen.
You have now found
the conditions
in which the desire
of your heart
can become the
reality of your being.
Stay here until you
acquire a force in you
that nothing can destroy.
Then you will need
to go back into life,
and there, you will
measure yourself constantly
with forces which will
show you your place.